Announce deprecation of non-Java plugins and runtimes (#4256)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2021/04/2021-04-16-deprecated-ruby-runtime.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Deprecated ruby-runtime and associated plugins"
tags:
- ruby
- plugins
authors:
- halkeye
opengraph:

>   image: /images/post-images/2021-04-deprecating-ruby-runtime.png

Author: @MarkEWaite was the image editing expert :)

maybe one of https://emojipedia.org/broken-heart/ ?

>   image: /images/post-images/2021-04-deprecating-ruby-runtime.png

Reviewer: From the [Jenkins Social Media Covers](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Q1PgNnRTgzBpVRXPqQo3PudzCa2eoc6_1_NRjFRMLrU/edit#slide=id.gcde1b2bfe8_0_0) slides, here is an alternative:

![2021-04-deprecating-ruby-runtime-broken-heart png](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/156685/115060220-db89d300-9ea4-11eb-9683-a94fd864e5c1.png)

Rename as appropriate

>   image: /images/post-images/2021-04-deprecating-ruby-runtime.png

Reviewer 2: I am not sure we want to risk giving the false impression that Jenkins no longer supports Ruby-based _projects_.

>   image: /images/post-images/2021-04-deprecating-ruby-runtime.png

Reviewer 3: Agree with Jesse, we still love Ruby (as much as we did before). The little used Ruby Runtime is just not something that can/should be used to write Jenkins plugins anymore.

>   image: /images/post-images/2021-04-deprecating-ruby-runtime.png

Reviewer: How about this as an alternate opengraph image in a positive sense rather than a negative sense:

![2021-04-deprecating-ruby-runtime](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/156685/115084839-abebc280-9ec6-11eb-9054-d3d6aff67046.png)

>   image: /images/post-images/2021-04-deprecating-ruby-runtime.png

Reviewer: Those images have been discarded.  See the current proposal at https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/pull/4256#issuecomment-821823663

---
Approximately
https://github.com/jenkinsci/ruby-runtime-plugin/commit/d368b087fadb3282c9b537f0fa6d9a150b080c73[10 years ago, ruby-runtime was first released]. It was an experiment to let
plugins to be written in ruby but still get integrated into the main
java Jenkins process.

Over the years though, the experiment has stopped being maintained, the
dozen or so plugins that use it take a lot of user effort to make work,
and the Jenkins ruby runtime does not support Java 11.
Specifically the last few years have been really hard on the Jenkins
core developers, as they still have to maintain all the hacks and

> processes to keep the ruby runtime barely working.

Reviewer 3: This part and the impact do not align. Either we keep the hacks in, in which case this doesn't help, or we remove it, then there is "future releases won't support this anymore" impact.

Reviewer: I like the idea that we should add a statement that support for those plugins will be removed in a future release.  The ruby runtime plugins already don't work with Java 11.  Let's make it clear that we're reducing the maintenance costs caused by the ruby runtime by declaring that a future Jenkins release will drop all support for ruby runtime.

One month from now, May 15th, 2021, the Jenkins update center will stop distributing

> ruby-runtime and its https://plugins.jenkins.io/ruby-runtime/#dependencies[associated plugins].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ruby-runtime and its https://plugins.jenkins.io/ruby-runtime/#dependencies[associated plugins].
The Jenkins security team will also stop providing security fixes for these plugins.
```

Reviewer 3: 👎 We haven't done that anyway, see https://plugins.jenkins.io/gitlab-hook/

All of these plugins that we had findings for were abandoned, so https://www.jenkins.io/security/plugins/ applied.

> ruby-runtime and its https://plugins.jenkins.io/ruby-runtime/#dependencies[associated plugins].

Author: I looked, I didn't see anything. Do you have something specific I should be seeing?

== What does this mean for you?

> If you are one of the few users who are using the following plugins. The

Reviewer 3: … unless we decide to clean up Stapler and Core.

only change will come for new installs. Suspended plugins can stay
installed, but can not be newly installed without manually downloading
releases.

> The lists below provide additional information about the most popular plugins based on the Ruby runtime.

Reviewer: The list is a combination of alternatives and justification.

When we know an alternative (especially for a plugin like the gitlab-hooks plugin with over 20 000 installations), I think it will help the reader to understand the alternatives for that plugin.  I've seen at least two tables to divs bug reports recently that included ruby-runtime and dependent plugins.  Offering alternatives when we have them.

The justification part was a sanity check for me.  I was worried that one or more of the plugins might still be active, so I checked the last release date and offered it as part of the text.  I don't have strong objections if that justification is removed.  Collecting the data has already met my needs.

> The lists below provide additional information about the most popular plugins based on the Ruby runtime.

Author: We can remove the headings, but I think the list of individual plugins is a really good idea. Most people won't click through.

> The lists below provide additional information about the most popular plugins based on the Ruby runtime.

Reviewer: I used the headings as an excuse to visually separate the most frequently installed plugins from the others.  I'd like to have the most popular plugins at the top of the list, but don't feel a strong need for headings.  

The headings and the partitions they represent are arbitrary and not really relevant to readers.  If they aren't using a plugin, they don't care how many installations it has.  If they are using a plugin, they still don't care how many installations it has.

Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `cucumber` from the command line.

plugin:pyenv[pyenv]::
Last released **7 years ago**.
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `pyenv` from the command line.

plugin:rvm[Rvm]::
Last released **5 years ago**.
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `rvm` from the command line.

=== Fewer than 1000 installations

plugin:capitomcat[Capitomcat]::
Last released **6 years ago**.

Suggestion: Install Ruby and Capistrano and use `sh` or `bat` to invoke them from the command line.

plugin:commit-message-trigger-plugin[Commit Message Trigger]::
Last released **7 years ago**.
Suggestion: Use `sh`, `bat`, or other scripts to read git commit messages and conditionally execute Pipeline steps.

plugin:git-notes[git-notes]::
Last released **9 years ago**.
Suggestion: Use `sh`, `bat`, or other scripts to run `git` to annotate commits.

plugin:rbenv[rbenv]::
Last released **5 years ago**.
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `pyenv` from the command line.

=== Fewer than 500 installations

plugin:chef[Chef]::
Last released **6 years ago**.
Suggestion: Use `sh` or `bat` to run `chef` from the command line.

plugin:ci-skip[Ci Skip]::
Last released **7 years ago**.

> Suggestion: Use `sh`, `bat`, or other scripts to read git commit messages and conditionally execute Pipeline steps.

Reviewer 2: IIRC there are some maintained Jenkins plugins to do something similar.

Reviewer 5: https://github.com/jenkinsci/scm-trait-commit-skip-plugin

last commit:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/21194782/115037709-a9896880-9ec6-11eb-954f-3cbdce653b1d.png)

Over the years though, the experiments are no longer being maintained, the
dozen or so plugins that use the non-Java runtimes take a lot of compatibility effort.
In addition, the Jenkins ruby runtime does not support Java 11.
Specifically, the last few years have been really hard on the Jenkins
core developers, as they still have to maintain all the hacks and
processes to keep the non-Java runtimes barely working.
Examples of the experienced issues include compatibility with jep:200[Switch Remoting/XStream blocklist to a permitlist] where we had to allow many Ruby Runtime classes in the Jenkins core to support serialization of data.
In 2018 we discussed the future of the Ruby Runtime based plugins.
There was a consensus that we want to deprecate and remove the plugins so that Jenkins users do not experience issues .
link:/blog/authors/daniel-beck/[Daniel Beck] created jep:7[Deprecation of ruby-runtime] for that.
Over the years, the functionality provided by Ruby plugins has been largely replaced by other implementations,
and hence we have decided to proceed with the deprecation
(link:https://groups.google.com/u/1/g/jenkinsci-dev/c/Ve0fqAud3Mk/m/lVejhAjNAQAJ[discussion]).

> One month from now, May 15th, 2021, the link:https://updates.jenkins.io/[default Jenkins update center] will stop distributing

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
One month from now, January 22nd, 2022, the link:https://updates.jenkins.io/[default Jenkins update center] will stop distributing
```
